---
title: Age of Reckoning
date: 2018-11-21
---

We are currently in the transition from the Information Age to what I
call the "**Age of Reckoning**."  

In the Industrial Age and the Information Age, there was widespread optimism
that technology would eventually solve all of our problems-poverty, disease,
violence, and others. In the last 5 years or so, it has been slowly dawning on
us that more technology, by itself, cannot be the solution, and in fact, the
systems we currently have in place, while they solve some problems, create other
problems that may be equally severe.  

While technology has certainly lifted many humans out of poverty and enriched
our lives in many ways, it has also made the world increasingly complex and
difficult to navigate. The rapid disruption of many established industries has
meant that even the most intelligent and conscientious individuals have had to
struggle to stay relevant in the modern globalized economy—while others,
inundated with information to make sense of, can’t figure out how to make all
the right decisions the first time, and must spend years broke, jobless,
underemployed, or burnt out. We are not weaker or stupider than our ancestors,
but the world is more challenging than ever before and we need to go through
more trial and error than they did in order to secure a comfortable existence.
Continued technological development will increase material abundance even more,
but technology alone cannot solve the problem of figuring out whom to distribute
resources to and getting everyone on board with how resources are distributed.  

The internet has enabled new modes of social interaction that the evolution of
our primate brains didn’t equip us to handle. Despite the fact that we are
supposed to be more connected than ever before, many people are lonely and
starved of genuine positive human attention. Many people don’t belong to
“tribes” or “bands” in which individuals are valued, the way our ancestors have
for millennia; instead, we all compete for attention on a globalized market
provided by social media, and many people are losing the competition, becoming
lonely and depressed, while even those who are winning, receiving a larger share
of positive attention than others, can often be anxious and insecure about
maintaining their position in the status hierarchy, because they, too, often
lack a close-knit social group in which people genuinely care about them.
Economic growth and technological development don’t increase the ratio of
available human attention to the amount of need for human attention (as both
scale linearly with the number of humans alive). We have to admit that we simply
don’t know how to solve this problem right now, but at any rate, it’s obvious
that we can’t rely on technology to be our savior.  

I believe that in order to confront the major problems that we will face this
century, we are going to have to look inward and confront some uncomfortable
truths about human nature, understand the fact that technology can amplify both
the best and the worst aspects of it, and possibly come together to make big
sacrifices in order to build a world that’s truly better for all of us. This is
the “**reckoning**” that I speak of.
  